Reinforcement Learning using EEG signals for Therapeutic Use of
Music in Emotion Management
Esha Dutta*, Ananya Bothra*, Theodora Chaspari, Thomas Ioerger, Bobak J. Mortazavi
Abstract— Prolonged influence of negative emotions can
result in clinical depression or anxiety, and while many
prescribed techniques exist, music therapy approaches,
coupled with psychotherapy, have shown to help lower
depressive symptoms, supplementing traditional treatment
approaches. Identifying the appropriate choice of music,
therefore, is of utmost importance. Selecting appropriate
playlists, however, are challenged by user feedback that
may inadvertently select songs that amplify the negative
effects. Therefore, this work uses electroencephalogram (EEG)
that automatically identifies the emotional impact of music
and trains a reinforcement-learning approach to identify an
adaptive personalized playlist of music to lead to improved
emotional states. This work uses data from 32 users, collected
in the publicly available DEAP dataset, to select songs for
users that guide them towards joyful emotional states. Using a
domain-specific reward-shaping function, a Q-learning agent
is able to correctly guide a majority of users to the target
emotional states, represented in a common emotion wheel.
The average angular error of all users is 57◦ , with a standard
deviation of 2.8 and the target emotional state is achieved.
Clinical relevance— Music therapy for improving clinical
depression and anxiety can be supplemented by additional
emotion-guided music decisions in remote and personal settings
by using automated techniques to capture emotional state and
identify music that best guides users to target joyful states.

I. INTRODUCTION
Disruptive emotional homeostasis is associated with fragile mental health [1]. Prolonged influence of negative emotions eventually alters the neurological circuitry of the brain
and gives rise to ailments such as clinical depression or
anxiety [2]; however, prescribed medications for these disorders may have various side-effects [3]. Music, as a medium
of emotion regulation, may supplement traditional treatment
methods and have positive impacts on anxiety levels, heart
rates, and blood pressure[4][5]. Music therapy, coupled with
psychotherapy, can lead to statistically significant lower
depressive symptoms [6].
The choice of appropriate music is important to ensure
positive outcomes from music-based intervention [7]. Music
selection is important, especially in individuals vulnerable for
depressive symptoms, and these individuals may not be able
to select appropriate music for healthy emotional transitions
[8]. Indeed, individuals with feelings of despondency can
misuse music as unhealthy coping mechanisms like emotion
focused coping [9], rumination [10], or social withdrawal
*ED and AB contributed equally to this work. ED, AB, TC, TI, and BM
are with the Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Texas A&M
University, College Station, Texas, 77807 {esha, ananya1994,

chaspari, ioerger, bobakm}@tamu.edu
978-1-7281-1990-8/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE

[11]; depressed listeners are naturally drawn to sad music
despite its potentially-negative impact on their cognitive state
[10]. Therefore, a solution to predict or derive the optimized
sequence of music, which can drive the current emotional
state of a subject to the desired cognitive state is desired.
Reinforcement learning-based approaches to generate personalised playlists have aimed to address this goal of optimal
sequence of music. However, these approaches traditionally
incorporate user feedback (pauses, replays, and skips of
songs) [12]. The publicly available DEAP dataset recorded
electroencephalogram (EEG) and peripheral physiological
signals of 32 participants while each of them was watching
40 one-minute long excerpts of music clips [13], which
provides a wearable sensors-based approach to automatically
identifying user preference for a reinforcement learning
agent. Indeed, classifying emotional signals with the help of
EEG data has been a focus of recent [14]. However, blindly
adapting such data to Q-learning agents requires specialized
reward functions or reward-shaping techniques to help guide
learning agents to avoid local minimum solutions that would
impact performance. Such reward-shaping is necessary because the policy space is too large to explore exhaustively
[15] and reinforcement learning often needs domain-specific
reward shaping to optimize performance [16]. This work
aims to use music and emotion data made available from
DEAP, extracted from EEG signals rather than using the
data from direct user feedback, to train a Q-learning agent
to automate the personalized selection of music sequences
using a specialized reward-shaping function.
II. DATA SET D ESCRIPTION
We used the DEAP dataset [13] for our implementation,
which recorded electroencephalogram (EEG) and peripheral
physiological signals of 32 participants. while each watched
40 one-minute long excerpts of music clips. For each clip,
a fixation screen was displayed and a 2-minute long EEG
signal was recorded to calibrate each user to a relaxed state
prior to viewing a music clip. The EEG data can be processed
using algorithms such as support vector machines (SVM),
long short-term memory networks (LSTM), k nearest neighbor (KNN), etc.[14] to obtain individual valence, arousal,
dominance and preference values; the DEAP dataset contains
processed valence and arousal, which is used in this work.
III. M ETHOD
A. Music recommendation using Reinforcement Learning
We employed a Q-learning model for developing the music
recommendation system. The reward considered was based

5553

Authorized licensed use limited to: SARDAR VALLABHBHAI NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECH. Downloaded on March 22,2026 at 16:27:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 1: Our proposed music recommendation system trained with Q-learning reinforcement learning.

on the emotions as mapped in the 2D Geneva Emotion Wheel
(GEW), where positive emotions are in the upper right quadrant, negative/depressive emotions in the lower left quadrant,
anger in the upper left quadrant, and hopefulness in the lower
right quadrant [17]. The GEW defines a 2D circular space
with horizontal axis representing valence (positive or negative influence of an emotion) and vertical axis representing
arousal (the degree of excitement or calmness associated with
the current cognitive state). An action represents presentation
of a selected music to a given subject to influence his/her
emotions and the entire model is illustrated in Fig. 1.
To model the emotion transition, we begin with training
the Q-learning agent which is represented in the form of
a Q-table. The adaptation rule used to iteratively update
the Q table for a current emotional state s, action a and
next emotional state s’ is given in the standard Q-learning
equation:
Q(s, a) = (1−α)Q(s, a)+α[r(s, a)+γ max
Q(s0 , a0 )+φ(s, s0 )]
0
∀a

0

where s = δ(s, a) is the next state due to action a at state
s, r(s, a) is the reward obtained by agent for taking action
a at state s, φ(s, s0 ) is the transition function due to reward
shaping and α, γ are scale factors in [0, 1].
During the control phase, we determine the current emotion of the subject by his/her EEG data. Next, the learning
agent refers back to the trained Q-table and selects the best
possible music clip to drive the subject towards targeted
mental state.
B. Intermediate State Representation
To determine the impact of the music clip on the current
cognitive state of the individual, we use the GEW and
a (valence, arousal) tuple for each clip and each subject.
Thus, the impact of each music clip on a subject can also

be envisioned as a vector on the 2-D plane as described
above, and transitions as angular rotations between these
coordinates. The intermediate mental state of a subject post
listening to a music clip can thus be determined by the
transition function denoted by τ (s, a) such that
−
−
τ (s, a) = →
vs + →
va , −
v→
s0 = τ (s, a)
where −
v→
s0 is the potential intermediate next state emotion
−
vector, s is the current emotional state represented as →
vs
in GEW, and a represents the subjected music inducing
−
emotion denoted by →
va . This transition function is motivated
by the idea that the mental state of an individual subjected
to an external stimulus would depend on the nature of the
stimulus and the initial emotional state of the individual.
Iterative adaptation of the transition function helps us define
the next state table which captures the potential emotional
states corresponding to the responses to music stimuli from
a given cognitive state.
C. Reward Function
In this model, the basic reward function provided an agent
an immediate reward of +1 if the presented action drove the
cognition closer to the target emotional state and 0 otherwise.
The reward at state s (current emotional state) for an action
a (music clip) is denoted as:
(
1, if θ(s, a) ≤ 180◦
r(s, a) =
0, otherwise
where, θ(s, a) = |θ1 | + |θ2 | and

→
−
−
v∗ · →
va
θ∗ = arccos →
−
|−
v∗ ||→
va |
→
−
→
−
where θ uses v and θ uses v , with −π < θ , θ

1
t
2
s
1 2 ≤
π. The motivation for the aforesaid reward function is to

5554
Authorized licensed use limited to: SARDAR VALLABHBHAI NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECH. Downloaded on March 22,2026 at 16:27:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE I: Mean angular error (and standard deviation) for
Total (T) 32 subjects, the 19 subjects that achieve target
emotional state success (S), and remaining 13 subjects (F)
over six music clips (iterations)
T
S
F

Clip 1-2
68.3(14.1)
54.7(3.6)
88.2(17.9)

3
67.4(10.9)
39.1(3.2)
108.0(16.8)

4
62.9(9.9)
38.3(3.1)
99.1(15.3)

5
60.1(11.5)
23.1(2.4)
114.1(18.1)

6
56.9(11.1)
11.3 (2.7)
123.7 (17.3)

Fig. 2: Angular Error (degrees) and reward shaping.

encourage the agent to select music stimuli in such a way
that the subject is driven towards the target emotional state.
D. Reward shaping
Building a robust emotion control model requires an
exhaustive music library and user reaction to this library in
order, which can invoke all possible emotion transitions. Due
to this limitation of building the action space (and the data
available in DEAP all stemming from a neutral state), the
Q-learning agent often greedily selected the locally optimal,
which was not the targeted emotion. For example, the Qlearning agent suggested a music clip that put a subject in
a state of shame, and no music clips in the database exist
that brought the user out of this state. This was mitigated
by introducing prior domain knowledge to train the agent so
that it was guided towards the globally optimal solution by
shaping the reward function.
We introduce an additional reward for a successful state
transition. That is, not only was the agent rewarded for
making a transition towards a more positive emotion but
also was rewarded for making any transition from one state
to another, irrespective of it being positive/negative. This
ensures that the agent never gets stuck to any cognitive state,
other than the target positive emotional state. The shaping
function for transitioning from current state (say, s) to the
next state (say, s0 ) is defined as:
(
λ, if both s and s’ are same
φ(s, s’) =
0, otherwise
As we wanted to discourage the agent from remaining in the
same emotional state, λ assumed a large negative value for
practical implementations, -100 (a tenth of regret value).
IV. EXPERIMENT AND RESULTS
Using the extracted emotion data from the EEG readings in
the DEAP dataset, this work conducted a leave-one-subjectout cross-validation to train a Q-learning agent and evaluate
the ability of the agent to provide a playlist that would result
in the targeted emotional state (happy, pride, anger, disgust,
guilt, sadness, interest, and relief ). We reduced this from
the 16 emotions on the wheel by splitting every missing

Fig. 3: Mean angular error & standard error

emotion into two, merging into neighboring emotions, partially due to label imbalance on the removed emotions. These
experiments, along with the necessary hyperparameter tuning
and corresponding results, are explained in the subsequent
sections.
A. Hyper-parameter Tuning
The Q-Learning model had three hyper-parameters that
needed to be tuned: learning rate (α), discount factor (γ),
and exploration/exploitation ratio (). These hyper-parameter
were tuned using grid search method with an internal 10-fold
cross-validation on the training data, resulting in optimal
vales of α as 0.1 and γ as 0.6. The model was also
evaluated for the value of  as 0 and 0.1. It was observed
that in both cases, the regret (integral of angular error)
increased linearly for increasing iterations initially. However,
as iterations progressed, the regret tended to saturate with  as
0.1 but was unbounded in the other scenario. This suggested
that the agent learnt the problem better while adopting an
-greedy learning approach.
B. Model Evaluation
Initially, when the Q-table was trained without incorporating reward shaping, the Q learning agent was unable to
suggest a sequence of music clips to drive the target state
to happy. This is evident from Fig. 2 where the increasing
and subsequent saturation of angular error (without reward
shaping) indicated that the model failed to converge to the
target emotion.
Alternatively, Fig. 2 demonstrates that the Q learning agent
was able to suggest sequences when the Q-table was trained
with reward shaping. Of the 32 subjects, 19 cases converged
to the target happy state. Fig. 3 lists the average (mean)
angular error (with standard deviations) over all participants,
and Table I breaks further into those that achieved the target

5555
Authorized licensed use limited to: SARDAR VALLABHBHAI NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECH. Downloaded on March 22,2026 at 16:27:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VI. CONCLUSIONS

Fig. 4: Angular error and emotional state for two subjects:
9 who converged to the target state and 28 who did not

emotional state and those that did not, over six iterations.
Importantly, for those 19 users a total of 9 clips are selected,
demonstrating that while the first clips may be standard,
unique playlists were selected based upon each subject’s
EEG data captured during the music clips as the iterations
increased. The Q learning agent was able to create a playlist
that consistently led users towards the happy target state, and
the more music clips allowed the more users converged. The
angular error in the sixth iteration converged to less than 60◦ .
The number of iterations was obtained by empirical analysis
and increasing the iterations further did not substantially
improve the results.
This is likely a function of two findings: 1) that the number
of similar joyous targets, and an imbalance in the selection
of joyous states in the DEAP dataset, allow most users to
get close to our designated target of happy; and 2) the larger
error bars illustrate that for 19 subjects the angular error
approaches 0 as each individual reaches the key target state,
and those that do not converge have a wider array of possible
angular error values. Two such cases (one convergent, one
divergent) are illustrated in Fig. 4. The average angular error
in the sixth iteration for the 19 participants is 11.3◦ , with a
standard deviation of 2.8 , while the average angular error
in the sixth iteration for the remaining 13 participants is
123.7◦ , with a standard deviation of 17.3. EEG data is able
to find the target state for 19 users and the Q learning agent
is able to do so with a minimal number of iterations. Further
exploration is needed to determine why subject 28 in Fig. 4,
and similar such subjects, oscillate between emotional states
but do not converge on the target, perhaps because of the
reward shaping mechanism employed to aid most subjects.
V. LIMITATION AND FUTURE WORKS
We create personalized playlists to help subjects arrive
at target emotional states. We can explore additional rewards based upon additional input data including further
processing of EEG data and acquiring user feedback, which
may demonstrate variations along the emotion wheel. We
will develop a sequence of music to fine-tune the emotional
experiences and demonstrate effectiveness across emotional
states. Ultimately, randomized control trials are needed to
validate the effectiveness in improving emotional states.

This work developed a reinforcement learning approach
for developing music playlists targeted at emotion regulation
based upon wearable EEG data. Using just six music clips
in a playlist, 19 of the 32 subjects in the publicly available
DEAP dataset arrived at a joyful target emotional state, with
a mean angular error of 11.3◦ (standard deviation: 2.8◦ ), with
the overall mean angular error of 57.0◦ , when calculated
in a leave-one-subject-out cross-validation. Importantly, this
work demonstrated an angular error-based reward shaping
function that a Q-learning agent used to select songs to
arrive at a target emotion, even if each individual clip would
not. This work presented a framework of taking processed,
wearable EEG data to derive personalized, emotion-driven
music playlists, which enables future studies on emotional
health applications and interventions.
R EFERENCES
[1] E. X. Freed, “Alcoholism and manic-depressive disorders: Some
perspectives.” Quarterly Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 1970.
[2] E. J. Nestler, M. Barrot, R. J. DiLeone, A. J. Eisch, S. J. Gold, and
L. M. Monteggia, “Neurobiology of depression,” Neuron, vol. 34,
no. 1, pp. 13–25, 2002.
[3] B. Blackwell, “Adverse effects of antidepressant drugs,” Drugs,
vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 201–219, 1981.
[4] S. L. Siedliecki and M. Good, “Effect of music on power, pain,
depression and disability,” Journal of advanced nursing, vol. 54, no. 5,
pp. 553–562, 2006.
[5] J. Bradt, C. Dileo, and M. Shim, “Music interventions for preoperative
anxiety,” Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, no. 6, 2013.
[6] S. Castillo-Pérez, V. Gómez-Pérez, M. C. Velasco, E. Pérez-Campos,
and M.-A. Mayoral, “Effects of music therapy on depression compared
with psychotherapy,” The Arts in Psychotherapy, vol. 37, no. 5, pp.
387–390, 2010.
[7] S. Garrido, C. J. Stevens, E. Chang, L. Dunne, and J. Perz, “Music and
dementia: individual differences in response to personalized playlists,”
Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, vol. 64, no. 3, pp. 933–941, 2018.
[8] S. Garrido and E. Schubert, “Moody melodies: Do they cheer us up?
a study of the effect of sad music on mood,” Psychology of Music,
vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 244–261, 2015.
[9] D. Miranda, P. Gaudreau, R. Debrosse, J. Morizot, and L. J. Kirmayer,
“Music listening and mental health: Variations on internalizing psychopathology,” Music, health, and wellbeing, pp. 513–529, 2012.
[10] S. Garrido and E. Schubert, “Adaptive and maladaptive attraction to
negative emotions in music,” Musicae Scientiae, vol. 17, no. 2, pp.
147–166, 2013.
[11] K. S. McFerran and S. Saarikallio, “Depending on music to feel better:
Being conscious of responsibility when appropriating the power of
music,” The Arts in Psychotherapy, vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 89–97, 2014.
[12] C.-Y. Chi, R. T.-H. Tsai, J.-Y. Lai, and J. Y.-j. Hsu, “A reinforcement
learning approach to emotion-based automatic playlist generation,” in
2010 International Conference on Technologies and Applications of
Artificial Intelligence. IEEE, 2010, pp. 60–65.
[13] S. Koelstra, C. Muhl, M. Soleymani, J.-S. Lee, A. Yazdani,
T. Ebrahimi, T. Pun, A. Nijholt, and I. Patras, “Deap: A database
for emotion analysis; using physiological signals,” IEEE transactions
on affective computing, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 18–31, 2011.
[14] H. Chao, L. Dong, Y. Liu, and B. Lu, “Emotion recognition from
multiband eeg signals using capsnet,” Sensors, vol. 19, no. 9, p. 2212,
2019.
[15] A. D. Laud, “Theory and application of reward shaping in reinforcement learning,” Tech. Rep., 2004.
[16] M. Grzes and D. Kudenko, “Plan-based reward shaping for reinforcement learning,” in 2008 4th International IEEE Conference Intelligent
Systems, vol. 2. IEEE, 2008, pp. 10–22.
[17] T. Bänziger, V. Tran, and K. Scherer, “The emotion wheel. a tool for
the verbal report of emotional reactions,” in poster presented at the
conference of the International Society of Research on Emotion, Bari,
Italy, 2005.

5556
Authorized licensed use limited to: SARDAR VALLABHBHAI NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECH. Downloaded on March 22,2026 at 16:27:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

